
## Loading a Crystal Structure (CRYSTAL) {#c2-crystal}

~~~
CRYSTAL file.cif [datablock.s]
CRYSTAL file.res
CRYSTAL file.ins
CRYSTAL file.16
CRYSTAL file.21
CRYSTAL file.dmain
CRYSTAL file.cube
CRYSTAL file.bincube
CRYSTAL file.struct
CRYSTAL [file.]{POSCAR,CONTCAR,CHGCAR,CHG,ELFCAR,AECCAR0,AECCAR1,AECCAR2} [at1.s at2.s ...|POTCAR]
CRYSTAL file_{DEN|PAWDEN|ELF|POT|VHA|VHXC|VXC|VCLMB|VPSP|GDEN1|GDEN2|GDEN3|LDEN|KDEN}
CRYSTAL file.OUT # (GEOMETRY.OUT, elk)
CRYSTAL file.out [istruct.i] # (file.scf.out, quantum espresso output)
CRYSTAL file.out # (file.out, crystal output)
CRYSTAL file.in # (file.scf.in, quantum espresso input)
CRYSTAL file.STRUCT_IN
CRYSTAL file.STRUCT_OUT
CRYSTAL file.gen
CRYSTAL file.xsf
CRYSTAL file.axsf [istruct.i [xnudge.r]]
CRYSTAL file.pwc
CRYSTAL file.{in,in.next_step} # (geometry.in, FHIaims input)
CRYSTAL file.{out,own} # (FHIaims output)
CRYSTAL file.frac
CRYSTAL [CIF|SHELX|21|CUBE|BINCUBE|WIEN|ABINIT|ELK|QE_IN|QE_OUT|CRYSTAL|XYZ|WFN|WFX|
         FCHK|MOLDEN|GAUSSIAN|SIESTA|XSF|GEN|VASP|PWC|AXSF|DAT|PGOUT|ORCA|DMAIN|
         FHIAIMS_IN|FHIAIMS_OUT|FRAC] ...
CRYSTAL
 SPG [hall.i|ita.i HM|spg.s]
 CELL a.r b.r c.r alpha.r beta.r gamma.r [ANG|ANGSTROM|BOHR|AU]
 CARTESIAN [scal.r]
   [BOHR/AU]
   [ANGSTROM/ANG]
   x1.r y1.r z1.r
   x2.r y2.r z2.r
   x3.r y3.r z3.r
 ENDCARTESIAN/END
 NEQ x.r y.r z.r at.s [ANG|ANGSTROM] [BOHR|AU]
 atom.s x.r y.r z.r [ANG|ANGSTROM] [BOHR/AU]
 atnumber.i x.r y.r z.r [ANG|ANGSTROM] [BOHR/AU]
 ...
 SYMM exprx.s, epxry.s, exprz.s
ENDCRYSTAL/END
CRYSTAL LIBRARY label.s
~~~
The first line of a critic2 input usually specifies the
structure. Critic2 can read a large number of crystal structure
formats. In the simplest usage, critic2 reads one of the common file
formats like, for instance, a cif file. This is done by using:
~~~
CRYSTAL file.s
~~~
The extension of `file.s` is used to determine the appropriate reading
format.

The [MOLECULE](/critic2/manual/molecule/#c2-molecule) keyword can be
used as a replacement for CRYSTAL in the
entries above. MOLECULE is used when the structure is a gas-phase
molecule. For instance, cube files calculated with Gaussian (e.g. using
`cubegen`) can be read by critic2.

The default distance units in the rest of the input and in the output
once CRYSTAL is used are atomic units (bohr). This behavior can be
changed with the [UNITS](/critic2/manual/inputoutput/#c2-units)
keyword. The output of the CRYSTAL keyword is explained
[here](/critic2/manual/inputoutput/#c2-simplecrystal). A detailed list
of the file formats understood by critic2 follows.

### Cube Files (cube, bincube)

Gaussian cube files read using CRYSTAL are assumed to represent a
periodic system. This format is used by Quantum ESPRESSO and other
programs.

Despite their name, cube files may be used to represent non-orthogonal
cells, and have become a de facto standard. They can be written by a
lot of popular solid-state programs, so it is a good choice if critic2
provides no native interface to the densities written in the native
format of your program.

Critic2 can be used to convert cube files to binary format in order to
save disk space and reading/writing time. Binary cube files have
extension `.bincube`, and contain essentially the same information as
the usual cube file.

### WIEN2k (struct)

The structure of a crystal in WIEN2k is written to a file with
extension `.struct`. WIEN2k's struct files may or may not contain the
symmetry operations (for instance, if they have been generated by the
web interface but not run).

### VASP (POSCAR, CONTCAR, CHGCAR, CHG, AECCAR*, ELFCAR)

In VASP, the crystal structure can be read from a number of files,
including the `POSCAR` (recommended), the `CONTCAR`, the `CHGCAR`, and
others. Depending on the version, VASP's `POSCAR` and `CONTCAR` (and
also the rest) may be missing the atomic symbols. In that case, they
need to be provided by hand after the file name, either using a list
of atomic symbols or the location of the `POTCAR`. Files that contain
the word `POSCAR`, `CONTCAR`, `CHG`, `CHGCAR`, `AECCAR0`, `AECCAR1`,
`AECCAR2`, and `ELFCAR` are also accepted (e.g. `nacl.POSCAR` or
`POSCAR_nacl`). Note that the pseudopotential charges
([ZPSP](/critic2/manual/crystal/#c2-charge)) are NOT read from the
POTCAR.

### Elk (OUT)

In elk, the geometry is written to the `GEOMETRY.OUT` file. Any file
with extension `.OUT` will be assumed to be in elk's `GEOMETRY.OUT`
format (even though it may not be called `GEOMETRY.OUT`). The atomic
numbers are inferred from the name of the species file. The atomic
names are the symbols for those atomic numbers, with an integer suffix
that corresponds to the species file for that atom (first file = 1,
second file = 2, and so on).

### Quantum ESPRESSO (scf.in, scf.out)

In addition to reading Gaussian cube files generated by Quantum
ESPRESSO, the outputs (extension `.scf.out`) and inputs (`.scf.in`) of
pw.x are also understood by critic2. By default, the last geometry in
the output file is read. If an optional `istruct.i` integer is given,
then read the structure corresponding that number (only for geometry
optimization jobs).

For Quantum ESPRESSO inputs (`file.scf.in`), only the `.in` extension
is detected.

### Crystal (out)

Crystal outputs are read if the file has the extension `.out`. Critic2
will automatically detect whether the file is a crystal or a Quantum
ESPRESSO output (which has the same `.out` extension). Currently, only
periodic crystals are supported (no SLAB, POLYMER or MOLECULE). In
addition, this module has been tested for crystal06 and crystal14
only.

### CIF files (cif)

CIF files are the standard format for crystal structures in the
crystallography community. The standard is published by the
International Union for Crystallography (the core CIF dictionary).
In critic2, CIF files are read using the ciftbx library by Sydney
R. Hall. If the CIF file provides the crystal symmetry, the symmetry
operations are read and used.

CIF files can contain multiple structures in "data blocks". The
specific data block to read from a multi-block cif file can be
specified with the optional argument `datablock.s`. For instance, to
read the `data_shelx` block, use `datablock.s = shelx`. If
`datablock.s` is not present, then the first block is read.

### SHELX res and ins files (res, ins, 16)

RES and INS files are generated and used by SHELX (and derivatives), a
program for the interpretation of experimental single-crystal X-ray
and neutron diffraction data. The INS (input) and RES (output) file
format specifications are almost identical, and follow the
"Alphabetical list of SHELXL instructions" document on the SHELX
website. The extension `.16` corresponds to a `fort.16` file generated
by [DMACRYS](http://www.chem.ucl.ac.uk/cposs/dmacrys/index.html),
which also uses the SHELX format.

### DMACRYS/NEIGHCRYS files (16, 21, dmain)

[DMACRYS](http://www.chem.ucl.ac.uk/cposs/dmacrys/index.html) is a
program for modeling molecular crystals using rigid molecules and
distributed atomic multipoles. The `fort.21` file generated by
NEIGHCRYS, part of the DMACRYS package can be read by critic2. It
contains the initial geometry. After geometry relaxation, DMACRYS
generates a `fort.16` file containing the final geometry, which can
also be read by critic2. In addition, critic2 can also read the initial
structure from the main input file, with extension `.dmain`.

### Abinit (DEN, PAWDEN, ELF, LDEN, etc.)

Abinit density files (with suffix `_DEN`) and PAW valence density
files (`_PAWDEN`) are binary files that, in addition to the electron
density grid, contain the structural information for the crystal. In
addition, other fields also generated by abinit (in the same format)
can be read, including the electron localization function (prtelf,
`_ELF` suffix), the Laplacian of the electron density, various
potentials (`_POT`, `_VHA`, `_VHXC`, `_VXC`, `_VCLMB`, `_VPSP`), the
kinetic energy density, and the components of the density gradient
(`_GDEN1`, `_GDEN2`, and `_GDEN3`).

### SIESTA (STRUCT_IN and STRUCT_OUT)

Critic2 can read the structure file generated by siesta has extension
`STRUCT_OUT`. In addition, the `STRUCT_IN` file (which has the same
format) is also understood by critic2.

### DFTB+ (gen)

DFTB+ reads and generates structures in the gen format. The gen format
can be read using the `GenFormat` driver in `Geometry`. It is also
written during geometry optimizations using `OutputPrefix` in
`Driver`. The gen format can be used for crystals (in which case it
should contain the lattice vectors at the end of the file) or
molecules.

### Xcrysden (xsf and axsf)

Xcrysden generates scalar field files with extension `.xsf`, which
also contain the crystal structure. If the xsf file contains a crystal
structure, the PRIMVEC and PRIMCOORD cards are read - everything else
is ignored.

The `.axsf` file is an animation file for xcrysden. It is typically
generated by the `dynmat.x` utility in Quantum ESPRESSO and it
contains the crystal structure as well as the eigenvectors
corresponding to all the phonon vibrations in the crystal at the
selected q-point (usually, gamma). The axsf file contains one matrix
of lattice vectors (PRIMVEC) and $$3*n$$ coordinate blocks (PRIMCOORD),
where $$n$$ is the number of atoms. Each PRIMCOORD block contains the
atomic positions (the same in all blocks) and the displacement
associated to the phonon eigenvectors in increasing order of
frequency. The optional parameter `istruct.i` gives which of these
PRIMCOORD blocks will be read by critic2 (default: the first
block). If `xnudge.r` is given, then displace the atomic positions by
the phonon displacement vectors times `xnudge.r`, in bohr. This option
is useful when following the eigenvector of a phonon with imaginary
frequency.

### Quantum ESPRESSO Wavefunction (pwc) {#c2-crypwc}

This file is generated by the pw2critic.x utility in the PP bundle of
Quantum ESPRESSO. The `.pwc` file contains the structural information
for the system as well as the k-point information and the converged
Kohn-Sham states. It is mostly used in the calculation of
delocalization indices in periodic solids.

### FHIaims inputs and outputs (in, in.next_step, out, own) {#c2-fhi}

Crystal (and molecular) structures can be loaded from an FHIaims
"geometry.in" input file. Only the `atom`, `atom_frac`, and
`lattice_vector` keywords are parsed and interpreted. If
at least one `lattice_vector` is present, the system is assumed to be
a crystal. Alternatively, you can also load the structure from the
"geometry.in.next_step" file written by FHIaims during a geometry
optimization.

The crystal or molecular structure can also be loaded from an FHIaims
output file, which is assumed to have a .out or .own extension. In the
case of a geometry optimization, the last available geometry in the
output file is read.

### TINKER frac format (frac) {#c2-tinkerfrac}

Crystal structures can be given in TINKER frac format. The `.frac`
file must contain the cell parameters in the second line. This
"complete" `.frac` file can be generated from an incomplete `.frac`
file (i.e. where the cell lengths and angles are in a separate `.key`
file) using TINKER's utility programs. The connectivity information is
discarded by critic2 and recalculated from scratch.

### Files with other extensions

If the crystal structure file you want to read does not have one of
the above extensions but conforms to one of these formats, you can
force critic2 to read the file using that particular format. To do
this, you must follow the `CRYSTAL` keyword with another keyword
specifying the required format. The allowed keywords are:

- `CUBE`: a cube file.

- `BINCUBE`: a binary cube file.

- `WIEN`: a WIEN2k `.struct` file.

- `VASP`: a VASP-style (POSCAR, CHGCAR,...) structure file.

- `ELK`: a `GEOMETRY.OUT` file from elk.

- `QE_IN`: a Quantum ESPRESSO input file.

- `QE_OUT`: a Quantum ESPRESSO output file.

- `CRYSTAL`: a crystal output file.

- `CIF`: a cif file.

- `SHELX`: a shelx-style file, typically with extension `.res`,
   `.ins`, or `fort.16`.

- `DMAIN`: a DMACRYS input file.

- `21`: a DMACRYS `fort.21` file.

- `ABINIT`: an ABINIT-style file (`DEN`,...)

- `SIESTA`: a SIESTA `STRUCT_IN` or `STRUCT_OUT` file.

- `GEN`: a DFTB+ gen file.

- `XSF`: an xcrysden `.xsf` file.

- `AXSF`: an xcrysden `.axsf` file.

- `PWC`: a `.pwc` file.

- `FHIAIMS_IN`: an FHIaims input file (`geometry.in`).

- `FHIAIMS_OUT`: an FHIaims output file.

- `FRAC`: a TINKER `.frac` file.

### Manual Specification of the Crystal Structure (CRYSTAL Environment)

The crystal structure can be specified by hand using the CRYSTAL
environment. For instance, the input for magnesium oxide (rocksalt
structure) would be:
~~~
CRYSTAL
  SPG F m -3 m
  CELL 4.213 4.213 4.213 90 90 90 ANG
  Mg 0 . 0.  0.
  O  1/2 1/2 1/2
ENDCRYSTAL
~~~
There are several relevant keywords in the CRYSTAL environment. A
space group can be specified with the SPG keyword, in which case only
the atoms in the asymmetric unit need to be given:
~~~
SPG [hall.i|ita.i HM|spg.s]
~~~
The SPG keyword used inside the crystal environment builds the
complete set of symmetry operations in the crystal from the space
group label or the space group number. The space group names known to
critic2 correspond to those given in the International Tables for
Crystallography vol. A, in the Hermann-Mauguin notation
(`spg.s`). Alternatively, the numerical ID for the space group in the
Hall notation (`hall.i`, from 1 to 530) or the ID for the group in the
ITA notation (`ita.i`, Hermann-Mauguin, from 1 to 230) can be
given. Using the ITA numerical ID of the group requires using the `HM`
keyword after the number. The arguments to `SPG` are blank- and
case-insensitive.  Examples `spg.s` labels are `F m -3 m`, `P b a 2`,
`P 1 n 1`, and `P 63 m c`. When the SPG keyword is used, only the
atoms in the asymmetric unit need to be given.

The complete list of space groups available to critic2 can be
retrieved using the [SPG keyword](#c2-spg) outside the CRYSTAL
environment. This list, along with example crystals, can also be found
in the [space group crystal
collection](/devnotes/space-group-collection/).  This is useful when
there is a choice of origin to be made for a particular space group or
if a non-standard setting is needed or in the case of rhombohedral
groups for choosing the hexagonal or rhombohedral axes.

If no SPG keyword is found in the CRYSTAL environment, then an
internal routine calculates the symmetry from the atomic
positions. (This behavior can be deactivated with the
[NOSYMM/NOSYM](/critic2/manual/crystal/#c2-symm) keyword.)  In this
case, all the atoms in the cell need to be given (in contrast to using
SPG, in which case only the asymmetric unit needs to be given).

There are two possible ways to input the cell parameters. In the
simplest approach, the CELL keyword can be used to give the cell
lengths and angles:
~~~
CELL a.r b.r c.r alpha.r beta.r gamma.r [ANG|ANGSTROM|BOHR|AU]
~~~
If the ANG (or ANGSTROM) keyword is used, then `a.r`, `b.r`, and `c.r`
are in angstrom. Otherwise, cell parameters are in bohr by default (the
keyword BOHR or AU can be used, but it is redundant). Using the CELL
keyword lets critic2 decide on the crystallographic-to-Cartesian
transformation matrix (which is not unique; critic2 always uses the
Cholesky decomposition of the metric tensor, for
consistency). Alternatively, one could input this matrix using the
CARTESIAN keyword:
~~~
CARTESIAN [scal.r]
  # comment
  [BOHR/AU]
  [ANGSTROM/ANG]
  x1.r y1.r z1.r
  x2.r y2.r z2.r
  x3.r y3.r z3.r
ENDCARTESIAN/END
~~~
CARTESIAN reads the Cartesian coordinates of the cell vectors in some
arbitrary orthonormal reference frame. Each row corresponds to a
vector. Hence, the metric tensor is $${\bf G} = {\bf R}{\bf R}^T$$
where $${\bf R}$$ is the matrix above. The coordinate transformation is
$$x_{\text{cryst}} = x_{\text{cart}}{\bf R}$$. If `scal.r` is given, all
vectors are scaled by that factor. The input units are bohr by
default. The default can be changed with a
[UNITS](/critic2/manual/inputoutput/#c2-units) keyword preceding
CRYSTAL or with the BOHR/AU and ANG/ANGSTROM keywords inside the
CARTESIAN environment. The CARTESIAN keyword is particularly useful
for inputs based on Quantum ESPRESSO results since the matrix
corresponds exactly to the CELL_PARAMETERS matrix, and scal.r can be
set to `celldm(1)`.

The NEQ keyword can be used to specify the atomic
positions. Equivalently, one can start the line with the atomic symbol
or the atomic number:
~~~
NEQ x.r y.r z.r at.s [ANG|ANGSTROM] [BOHR/AU]
atom.s x.r y.r z.r [ANG|ANGSTROM] [BOHR/AU]
atnumber.i x.r y.r z.r [ANG|ANGSTROM] [BOHR/AU]
~~~
NEQ adds one atom to the crystal. If symmetry is used (via SPG or
SYMM), then only the non-equivalent atom list needs to be given (as in
the MgO example above), which decreases the number of NEQs that are
necessary. Otherwise, the complete list of atoms in the cell has to be
given, and the symmetry guess will reduce it to the non-equivalent
atoms list. The coordinates `x.r`, `y.r`, and `z.r` are
crystallographic (fractional) coordinates unless the ANG/ANGSTROM or
BOHR/AU keywords are used. Using Cartesian coordinates requires a
previous CELL or CARTESIAN command in order to convert the atomic
positions to crystallographic coordinates. The atomic symbol is
`at.s`, and the atomic number is detected from the symbol
(essentially, from the beginning of it, so atoms like `Cl1` or `baxx2`
are valid). Deuterium (D) is detected as hydrogen.

The list of atomic positions can be extended by symmetry operations
specified using the SYMM keyword. The SYMM keyword accepts three
arithmetic expressions separated by commas. These expressions contain
the variables x, y, and z (case insensitive), and represent symmetry
operations in crystallographic coordinates. For instance:
~~~
SYMM -X+1/2, Y+1/2, -Z+1/2
~~~
would apply that operation to all atoms given as NEQ. If they are
different from the original, the new atoms are added to the list. This
keyword is useful in cases when it is difficult to pass SPG a certain
non-standard setting for a low-symmetry space group, or when the space
group symmetry is given in this format instead of a space group label
(e.g. cif files and SHELX res files).

### The Crystal Library (CRYSTAL LIBRARY) {#c2-library}

A library of (simple) crystal structures is provided with critic2, and
can be accessed using the CRYSTAL LIBRARY keyword:
~~~
CRYSTAL LIBRARY NaCl
~~~
Critic2 tries to find the "NaCl" label (case-insensitive) in an
internal library file that is distributed with the code, and located
in `dat/crystal.dat` relative to the source of the distribution. The
relevant library entry in this case reads:
~~~
STRUCTURE B1 rock_salt rocksalt NaCl
  CRYSTAL
    SPG f m -3 m
    CELL 5.6402 5.6402 5.6402 90 90 90 ANG
    NEQ 0.0 0.0 0.0 na
    NEQ 0.5 0.5 0.5 cl
  ENDCRYSTAL
ENDSTRUCTURE
~~~
Note four aliases (`B1`, `rock_salt`, `rocksalt`, and `NaCl`) are
defined for the same crystal structure. The syntax in the CRYSTAL
environment is exactly the same as above. The user can define their
own library of crystal structures either by modifying the crystal.dat
directly or by using the LIBRARY keyword:
~~~
LIBRARY CRYSTAL /path/to/library
~~~
where the indicated file is used instead to perform the lookup. The
path can be absolute or relative to the execution directory.

A similar library exists for molecules (`molecule.dat`) that can be
accessed through the
[MOLECULE](/critic2/manual/molecule/#c2-molecule) keyword. Both
`molecule.dat` and `crystal.dat` are installed in the data directory
by `make install`.

## List space group types (SPG) {#c2-spg}

The SPG keyword (used outside the CRYSTAL environment):
~~~
SPG
~~~
lists the space group types available to critic2. A brief extract of
its output is:
~~~
#Hall ITA   HM-short HM-long       choice  crys.-syst.  Hall-symbol
[...]
452   161   R3c      R3c            H      trigonal     [R 3 -2"c]
453   161   R3c      R3c            R      trigonal     [P 3* -2n]
454   162   P-31m    P-312/m               trigonal     [-P 3 2]
[...]
~~~
The SPG keyword lists, in order:
* The ID for the space group in Hall notation (from 1 to 530).
* The ID for the space group in Hermann-Mauguin international notation
  (from 1 to 230).
* The short Hermann-Mauguin label for the group.
* The long Hermann-Mauguin label for the group.
* The particular choice of axes/origin/setting for the group. For
  instance, H and R mean hexagonal and rhombohedral axes,
  respectively. In monoclinic groups, choice gives the privileged
  axis, etc.
* The crystal system.
* The space group type in Hall notation.

The `HM-short` and `HM-long` labels as well as the numerical Hall ID
for the group (`Hall`) and the ITA numerical ID (`ITA`) can all be
used in the SPG keyword inside [CRYSTAL](#c2-crystal). (Note that the
latter requires using the additional HM keyword.) A similar list can
be found in the [space group crystal
collection](/devnotes/space-group-collection/).

## Symmetry Options (SYM/NOSYM) {#c2-symm}

Critic2 uses the [spglib](https://atztogo.github.io/spglib/) library
to calculate the symmetry operations and space group label from the
crystal structure description. Symmetry is not used or calculated for
molecular systems. By default, if the crystal is very big (>2000 atoms
per unit cell), then the automatic calculation of the symmetry is
deactivated.

The treatment of symmetry in critic2 can be controlled using the
SYM and NOSYM keywords (or their equivalent spellings
SYMM/NOSYMM).
~~~
{SYMM|SYM}
{SYMM|SYM} [-1|0|1]
{SYMM|SYM} eps.r
{SYMM|SYM} CLEAR
{SYMM|SYM} RECALC
{SYMM|SYM} ANALYSIS
{SYMM|SYM} REFINE
{SYMM|SYM} WHOLEMOLS
NOSYMM|NOSYM
~~~
Without any other keywords, the SYM keyword writes the space group
information for the current crystal to the output.

Followed by an integer, SYM controls whether the symmetry operations
and space group are calculated for new structures given via
CRYSTAL. If the value is 1, symmetry is always calculated, regardless
of crystal size. If 0, symmetry is never calculated. If -1, calculate
the symmetry if the unit cell has fewer than 2000 atoms (this is the
default). NOSYM (or NOSYMM) is equivalent to `SYM 0`.

Additional keywords can be used to change the symmetry of an already
loaded crystal. If SYM is followed by a real number (`eps.r`), then
the precision with which the symmetry operations are determined is set
to this value. If a crystal has been loaded, then this command
recalculates the symmetry using the new precision. The default `eps.r`
is 1d-2 bohr.

The CLEAR keyword clears all symmetry operations (that is, use space
group P1). The RECALC keyword recalculates the symmetry
operations. This is useful in cases where the symmetry is read from an
external file, such as a cif file.

The REFINE keyword recalculates the atomic positions using the current
space-group operations to have them be exactly at the corresponding
symmetry sites. For instance, "0.333" may be converted to "0.3333333"
in a hexagonal crystal.

The WHOLEMOLS keyword must be applied to molecular crystals. It
eliminates symmetry operations from the space group in such a way that
the asymmetric unit is composed of whole molecules. This is useful
when generating `.res` files as input for the DMACRYS program.

If the symmetry is recalculated for a loaded crystal (with the
`eps.r`, CLEAR, RECALC, REFINE, or WHOLEMOLS options), then all fields
are unloaded and all critical point lists are cleared.

The ANALYSIS keyword explores different values of the precision
parameter (`eps.r`) and outputs the calculated space group symbol for
each of them. This keyword is useful when there is a crystal that may
have certain symmetry but there is interference from numerical or
experimental noise in the atomic positions or cell parameters. The
ANALYSIS keyword does not change the crystal structure or its symmetry
operations.

## Atomic Charge Options {#c2-charge}

The Q (or QAT) and ZPSP keywords can be used to change the atomic
charge and pseudopotential charge after CRYSTAL:
~~~
{Q|QAT} at1.s q1.r [at2.s q2.r] ...
ZPSP at1.s q1.r [at2.s q2.r] ...
~~~
This command changes the atomic charge (Q, QAT) or the pseudopotential
charge (ZPSP) of the atomic species `at1.s`, `at2.s`,.... Real numbers
for the charges and ZPSP are acceptable; the latter are internally
converted to integers. The charges (Q) are used to calculate the
point-charge electrostatic energy using
[EWALD](/critic2/manual/structure/#c2-ewald).

The role of ZPSP is to augment fields defined on a grid, a procedure
called *core augmentation*. ZPSP is the pseudopotential charge, that
is, the atomic number of the atom minus the number of electrons
represented by the pseudopotential. For instance, `ZPSP=2` is a usual
value for Ba. A typical way to use grids in critic2 involves loading
the valence density or pseudo-density and augmenting it to an
all-electron density that has maxima at the nuclear positions, which
is important for certain applications (for instance, plotting).  While
this procedure is not satisfactory from the theoretical point of view,
in practice, the valence regions are mostly unaffected. Core
augmentation needs not be used if the field is not the electron
density or if the grid already contains the core contributions, and it
is usually better to use the full all-electron density from the
electronic structure code, if it is able to generate it (e.g. using
the PAW method).

Core augmentation is not active by default, even if the ZPSP keyword
is used (using the CORE keyword during LOAD is required, see
[here](/critic2/manual/fields/#c2-addload)). The use of ZPSP as
above sets the pseudopotential charges for all current fields;
particular ZPSP values for certain fields can also be given during
LOAD. In a VASP calculation, the value of ZPSP can be found easily by
grepping 'ZVAL' in the POTCAR file. In Quantum ESPRESSO, this
information is in the UPF file (the "number of valence electrons"). In
abinit, it can be found in the pseudopotential files.

The keyword NOCORE clears the ZPSP values of all atoms in all fields:
~~~
NOCORE
~~~

## Loading Multiple Crystal Structures {#c2-reset}

Critic2 can only work with one structure at a given time. However,
more than one crystal can be loaded in the same run, simply by giving
a new CRYSTAL (or MOLECULE) keyword. When the second and subsequent
CRYSTAL/MOLECULE keywords are read, critic2 clears all the information
for the previous structure, including the structural data (cell
parameters, atomic positions, etc.) as well as all the fields that had
been loaded, all the critical point information, and the atomic and
core density grids. Effectively, critic2 behaves as if starting a new
run, except that the variables and global options are carried over. To
clear the variables and set the global options to their default
values, use the RESET keyword:
~~~
RESET
~~~
