
## Loading a Molecular Structure (MOLECULE) {#c2-molecule}

~~~
MOLECULE file.xyz [border.r] [CUBIC|CUBE]
MOLECULE file.wfn [border.r] [CUBIC|CUBE]
MOLECULE file.wfx [border.r] [CUBIC|CUBE]
MOLECULE file.fchk [border.r] [CUBIC|CUBE]
MOLECULE file.molden [border.r] [CUBIC|CUBE]
MOLECULE file.molden.input [border.r] [CUBIC|CUBE]
MOLECULE file.log [border.r] [CUBIC|CUBE]
MOLECULE file.dat [border.r] [CUBIC|CUBE]
MOLECULE file.out [border.r] [CUBIC|CUBE]
MOLECULE file.pgout [border.r] [CUBIC|CUBE]
MOLECULE file.gen [border.r] [CUBIC|CUBE]
MOLECULE file.cube
MOLECULE file.bincube
MOLECULE file.{in,in.next_step} # (geometry.in, FHIaims input)
MOLECULE file.{out,own} # (FHIaims output)
MOLECULE file.cif
MOLECULE ...
MOLECULE [CIF|SHELX|21|CUBE|BINCUBE|WIEN|ABINIT|ELK|QE_IN|QE_OUT|CRYSTAL|XYZ|WFN|WFX|
          FCHK|MOLDEN|GAUSSIAN|SIESTA|XSF|GEN|VASP|PWC|AXSF|DAT|PGOUT|ORCA|DMAIN|
          FHIAIMS_IN|FHIAIMS_OUT|FRAC] ...
MOLECULE
  NEQ x.r y.r z.r atom.s [ANG/ANGSTROM] [BOHR/AU]
  atom.s x.r y.r z.r [ANG/ANGSTROM] [BOHR/AU]
  atnumber.i x.r y.r z.r [ANG/ANGSTROM] [BOHR/AU]
  CUBIC|CUBE
  BORDER border.r
ENDMOLECULE/END
MOLECULE LIBRARY label.s
~~~

Critic2 can be used for gas-phase (isolated) molecules as well as
crystals. A molecular structure is loaded using the MOLECULE
keyword. The MOLECULE keyword is most often used for loading an xyz or
a similar format generated by a program that works natively with
gas-phase molecules (Gaussian, psi4, etc.). However, the molecular
geometry can also be given directly in the input using the
MOLECULE/ENDMOLECULE environment or using any of the formats typically
employed for crystals (cube, cif, scf.in, etc.). All file formats
valid in the [CRYSTAL](/critic2/manual/crystal/#c2-crystal) keyword
are also allowed in MOLECULE. As in the CRYSTAL case, the file
extension is used to interpret the file format.

Because critic2 always works under periodic boundary conditions, it
does the analysis of molecular structures by placing the molecule at
the center of a supercell large enough to contain it plus a
border. Provided the size of the vacuum is large enough, the results
of the analysis should be correct. The use of MOLECULE instead of
CRYSTAL changes some of the default behavior in critic2. Namely:

* The default distance units in input and output are angstrom instead
  of bohr (use the [UNITS](/critic2/manual/inputoutput/#c2-units)
  keyword to change this behavior). In particular, this applies to the
  Cartesian coordinates for the atoms in the MOLECULE environment and
  to the argument for BORDER. In the case of xyz, wfn, wfx, fchk, dat,
  out, pgout, molden, molden.input, gen, and cube files, the Cartesian
  coordinate system in input and output is the same as in the original
  file. The "Input orientation" is read from Gaussian log (output)
  files,

* The use of symmetry is automatically deactivated. All molecular
  structures are run in the P1 space group (equivalent to the C1
  point group).

* The default critical point search seeding strategy in 
  [AUTO](/critic2/manual/cpsearch/#c2-auto) is modified. In a crystal,
  a recursive subdivision of a symmetry-reduced portion of the
  Wigner-Seitz cell is used (SEED WS with DEPTH 1). In a molecule, the
  default is to seed at the center of every interatomic line between
  atom pairs less than 15 bohr apart (SEED PAIR).

* In addition to the supercell, a second smaller cell is defined, the
  "molecular cell". The molecular cell can be visualized by using the
  MOLCELL keyword in [WRITE](/critic2/manual/write/) or
  [CPREPORT](/critic2/manual/cpsearch/#c2-cpreport). The region
  outside the molecular cell is assumed to be vacuum outside molecular
  space. Any CPs found outside the molecular cell are discarded, and
  all downwards gradient paths that exit the molecular cell are
  assumed to have diverged to infinity.

A simple example of MOLECULE input and the corresponding output
generated by critic2 can be found 
[here](/critic2/manual/inputoutput/#c2-simplemol).
Multiple molecular and crystal structures can be read in
succession, same as in [CRYSTAL](/critic2/manual/crystal/#c2-crystal).

### Molecular File Formats (xyz, wfn, wfx, log, fchk, dat, out, pgout, molden, molden.input)

A gas-phase molecule can be input using an xyz file, a Gaussian
wfn/wfx file, a Gaussian output (log), a Gaussian formatted checkpoint
file (fchk), a psi4 output file (dat), an orca output file (out), a
postg output file (pgout), or a file in molden format (psi4, ADF,
orca, etc.). The molden.input extension is the same as molden (used by
orca). The input molecule is enclosed in a box that is larger
(default: 10 angstrom) in all directions than the minimal box
encompassing the molecule. If the CUBIC (or CUBE) keyword is given,
then a cubic supercell is used. The width of the vacuum around the
molecule can be changed with the optional `border.r` argument (by
default in angstrom, the units can be changed with the
[UNITS](/critic2/manual/inputoutput/#c2-units) keyword). The molecule
is automatically translated to the center of the supercell. The
transformation from fractional coordinates referred to the
encompassing cell to Cartesian coordinates is made so that the latter
correspond to the original coordinate system in the input file.  A
molecular cell is chosen following the default procedure, see below.

### DFTB+ gen Format (gen)

A molecule can be read in DFTB+'s gen file format. If no lattice
vectors are provided, the optional `border.r` and CUBIC (or CUBE)
keyword can be used to control the size and shape of the encompassing
cell. The same considerations as for xyz files apply.  The coordinates
in critic2's input and output are the same as in the gen file.

### Cube Files (cube, bincube)

Cube files are also often used to describe molecular structures. For
instance, the cube files generated by Gaussian's `cubegen` program. As
in the case of xyz files, the Cartesian coordinate system in the rest
of the input and in the output is chosen so that it is the same as in
the cube file.

Note that, contrary to xyz files, critic2 does not choose the size and
shape of the encompassing cell; the cell is given by the cube
file. Hence, the molecule is not translated by critic2, and it should
be centered for MOLECULE to work correctly.

Critic2 can be used to convert cube files to binary format in order to
save disk space and reading/writing time. Binary cube files have
extension .bincube, and contain essentially the same information as a
usual cube file.

### FHIaims inputs and outputs (in, in.next_step, out, own) {#c2-fhi}

Molecular (and crystal) structures can be loaded from an FHIaims
"geometry.in" input file. Alternatively, you can also load the
structure from the "geometry.in.next_step" file written by FHIaims
during a geometry optimization.

The molecular structure can also be loaded from an FHIaims output
file, which is assumed to have a .out or .own extension. In the case
of a geometry optimization, the last available geometry in the output
file is read.

### Other Crystallographic Formats (cif, scf.in,...)

All CRYSTAL keywords can be replaced by MOLECULE and viceversa, with
the effect discussed above. The behavior of MOLECULE in this case is
essentially the same as in the case of a cube file: the encompassing
cell is taken from the file, and the molecule is not translated in any
way.

### Files with other extensions

If the molecular structure file you want to read does not have one of
the above extensions but conforms to one of these formats, you can
force critic2 to read the file using that particular format. To do
this, you must follow the `MOLECULE` keyword with another keyword
specifying the required format. The allowed keywords are:

- `XYZ`: an `.xyz` file.

- `WFN`: a `.wfn` wavefunction file.

- `WFX`: a `.wfx` wavefunction file.

- `FCHK`: a Gaussian formatted checkpoint file (`.fchk`).

- `MOLDEN`: a Molden file (`.molden`).

- `DAT`: a psi4 output file (`.dat`).

- `PGOUT`: a postg output file (`.pgout`).

- `GAUSSIAN`: a Gaussian output file.

- `GEN`: a DFTB+ structure file (`.gen`).

- `CUBE`: a cube file.

- `BINCUBE`: a binary cube file.

- `FHIAIMS_IN`: an FHIaims input file (`geometry.in`).

- `FHIAIMS_OUT`: an FHIaims output file.

- `ORCA`: an ORCA output file.

### Manual Specification of the Molecular Structure (MOLECULE Environment)

A molecule can be specified directly in the input using the MOLECULE
environment. The atoms can be given in three different ways:
~~~
NEQ x.r y.r z.r atom.s [ANG/ANGSTROM] [BOHR/AU]
atom.s x.r y.r z.r [ANG/ANGSTROM] [BOHR/AU]
atnumber.i x.r y.r z.r [ANG/ANGSTROM] [BOHR/AU]
~~~
Each of these lines adds one atom to the molecule: the atom can be
given either with the NEQ keyword followed by the position and the
atomic symbol, or by putting the atomic symbol or the atomic number in
the first field. The position (`x.r`, `y.r`, `z.r`) must be given in
Cartesian coordinates. The units default to angstrom, but can be
changed using the ANG/ANGSTROM and BOHR/AU keywords, and also with the
global [UNITS](/critic2/manual/inputoutput/#c2-units) keyword.

The keywords CUBIC (or CUBE) and BORDER set the size and shape of the
encompassing supercell. This cell is taken as the minimal encompassing
cell plus a default border of 10 angstrom. This value can be changed
with the BORDER keyword (units: angstrom by default, unless changed by
the global UNITS keyword). The default cell is an orthogonal
box: the three axes have different lengths. To make the
cell cubic, use the CUBE/CUBIC keyword.

### The Molecular Library (MOLECULE LIBRARY)

A library of molecular structures is provided with critic2, and can be
accessed using the MOLECULE LIBRARY keyword:
~~~
MOLECULE LIBRARY h2o
~~~
The molecular library file is `dat/molecule.dat`, in the root of the
critic2 distribution. The location of the molecular library can be
changed using:
~~~
LIBRARY MOLECULE bleh.s
~~~
The behavior of the LIBRARY keyword is the same as in
[CRYSTAL](/critic2/manual/crystal/#c2-library).

## The Molecular Cell (MOLCELL) {#c2-molcell}

In molecular calculations, it is convenient to define a region of
space away from the molecule that represents infinity. Critical points
in this region are discarded because the electron density (and
therefore the gradient) is zero everywhere. Gradient paths that reach
this region are terminated as if they had diverged to infinity.

In molecular systems, critic2 will reserve some space close to the
edges of the cell encompassing the molecule for this region. The
remaining (smaller) cell where the molecule is placed is called the
"molecular cell". 

When the MOLECULE keyword is used, a molecular cell is automatically
set up. By default, the molecular cell is chosen as the minimal
encompassing cell for the molecule plus 80% of the border or 2 bohr,
whichever is larger. Naturally, the molecular cell can not exceed the
actual cell. If the molecular structure is loaded from an external
file (xyz, wfn, etc.), then critic2 will set up both the encompassing
and the molecular cells correctly. If the structure source is a cube
or any other file format in which the encompassing cell is read from
the file, it is the users' responsibility to leave enough room for the
molecular cell.

The size of the molecular cell can be changed after the structure is
read using the MOLECELL keyword:
~~~
MOLCELL [border.r]
~~~
The MOLCELL keyword calculates the smallest box encompassing the
molecule and then adds a border to it in order to build the molecular
cell. The border length can be controlled by passing a
numerical argument (`border.r`, in the default distance units for the
run, angstrom if you used MOLECULE to read the structure). Using this
keyword only makes sense if the molecule is placed close to the center
of the cell and if there enough vacuum between the molecule and the
cell edges to contain the molecular cell. If no numerical argument is
given, `border.r` defaults to 10 angstrom. In order to use MOLCELL,
the input structure needs to be read using the MOLECULE keyword and the
cell needs to be orthogonal.

